Of all of Paris’ famous monuments, and of these the French capital is in no short supply, Notre-Dame has the longest and richest 
of histories. At 130 meters long, 48 meters wide and 35 meters high, this vast Gothic cathedral has commanded most views of the 
Île de la Cité for more than 850 years.
Between the 11th and the 12th centuries, Paris emerged as the center of power in France, politically, economically, and 
intellectually, and the largest island in the Seine was the city’s beating heart. On October 12, 1160, Maurice de Sully rose to 
the office of Bishop of Paris and stated his intention to demolish the Church of Saint-Etienne and erect in its place a monument 
to the Virgin Mary that reflected the new status of the capital.
The first stone was laid three years later in the presence of King Louis VII Le Jeune and Pope Alexander III. The first period 
of construction in the building’s history lasted for almost 200 years, during which numerous architects such as Jean de Chelles, 
Pierre de Montreuil, Pierre de Chelles, Jean Ravy, and Jean le Bouteiller contributed to its new Gothic style. It was finally 
completed in 1345.
One of the first momentous events in Notre-Dame’s story came in 1431 when Henry VI, the King of England, was also crowned the 
King of France on December 16 amid the Hundred Years War. Earlier that year, the conflict had claimed the life of one of the most 
discussed figures in French history, the 19-year-old Joan of Arc, who was burned at the stake as a heretic. On July 7, 1456, an 
inquiry found her innocent of all crimes and declared her a martyr. In 1909, she was beatified in Notre-Dame by Pope Pius X, and 
made a saint 11 years later.
During the 16th century, the condition of the cathedral deteriorated significantly, with tombs and stained glass windows destroyed 
in the name of modernization and external features removed or vandalized due to claims of idolatry. However, Robert de Cotte led 
renovation works in the 1600s under the wishes of Louis XIII. It was in this period that it gained its famous organ, which still 
functions perfectly today.
Its fate turned downwards again when the French Revolution came to Paris. The church was turned into a food and wine store and 
fell into disrepair. Many of its statues also lost their heads, though due to hammer blows rather than the guillotine.
By the turn of the 19th century, the cathedral was on its last legs. But Napoleon saved it from ruin and was crowned Emperor 
there in December 1804. Further much-needed restoration took place between 1845 and 1870 under the government of King Louis 
Philippe I. The architects Eugène Viollet-le-Duc and Jean-Baptiste Lassus oversaw the work, with the former continuing on alone 
after his partner’s death in 1857.
Thankfully, neither of the World Wars brought significant harm to Notre-Dame, though its 13th-century Rose window was removed 
for fear of Nazi vandalism or looting. More cautious modernization followed in the second half of the 20th century, including 
the mechanization of the 13-ton Emmanuel bell and the extensive cleaning of the façades and sculptures.